In this exercise, we will implement email validation.
There are many types of email IDs and we will create a pattern which can validate almost all types of
email IDs.
So let's start the email validation.
The validation parameters we are considering are listed as below.
The email value can be divided into two major parts.
First is the user name, which is before the ADD sign.
And second is the domain name, which is after the ID sign.
So to understand in an easier way, we will discuss and understand these two parts separately and eventually
we will merge the pattern.
Let's discuss the user name part, which is before the ADD sign.
So the first thing is that the user name will start with a word character that is a carat inside the
square bracket.
I can say uppercase A to Z, lowercase A to Z, 0 to 9 and underscore a dot or a dash.
These are the valid characters in an email username.
The same we can achieve using a carrot sign that is for the beginning.
W Plus, when you say slash w plus it will consider underscores as well.
So now for A to Z and 0 to 9, we will simply use slash W plus and we will add a dot because dot is
a special character.
We are going to say slash, dot and a dash.
The second point is that width w plus dot and dash.
We will add a question mark as we need that there can be zero or one dash or dot.
So now the pattern is carat w plus inside the square brackets we have dot and dash and we put a question
mark just to make sure that we have at least zero or one occurrence.
That means there can be one occurrence or there may not be any dot or dash inside the user name.
The next thing is that even after a dash or a dot, there can be word characters.
So we will add one more slash W plus.
Now, in this case, the pattern will look like this.
Here in this point, we have one modification in the existing pattern that is a possibility that there
may not be a dot or a dash in the username section.
And then in that case, we will not have word characters after it.
So the dot dash question mark and W plus pattern may be zero times or more.
And to satisfy zero or more times we have an asterisk quantifier.
So now we will make a group of this and we'll add an asterisk.
Now the pattern looks like this, so we are done with the username section.
The next thing we need to add is an edge sign to the pattern.
Now we can discuss the part two.
That is the domain name, which appears after the sign.
The first validation after an ad sign is the same as we have discussed with username.
That is, it may have word character before or after a dash or a dot, so we can add it as it is.
Only the carrot will not be included as it is not about the beginning.
So now the pattern looks like this.
Next validation is that that has to be at least one dot.
And also there can be two or four character words after the dot.
For example, dot C0 is two characters, dot com is three characters and dot info is four characters.
So for that we will use slash, dot will add a W inside the curly brackets will say 2 to 4 characters
we may have and then I will add a plus sign just to show that there can be one or more occurrence of
this pattern and a dollar sign at the end for closing the word boundary.
That is a dollar after the plus sign.
So now the pattern looks like this.
To validate the email, let's try to apply this pattern on an email called ABCD 108 at gmail.com.
I will declare a string, assign the value.
Of course I'm going to add the pattern here and we'll use a test method to check whether it returns
true or false.
Let's run the code so it has validated this email as a valid email.
Now let's remove the edge sign and test it.
Now the output is false, so the pattern is checking each sign properly.
Next, we can remove the dot and run the test.
I'll add the edge sign again and we'll remove dot from gmail.com.
It still says false as the dot is missing and making the domain name invalid.
Now let's add dot com dot info and check the case.
So I will first of all add gmail.com dot info and run the code.
So it has successfully done the test.
The next test will try is with a dot in user name.
Let's add a dot after a BCD and run the code.
This also is considered as a valid email ID.
In the beginning I mentioned that you will be able to validate almost all email IDs.
Why am I saying almost?
Because in early days we had domains with single dot, for example, domain dot com.
Now we also have two dots as well.
For example, domain .0. UK.
We also had only three letters after dot that is for example dot com.
But now we have two letters like dot in R four.
Like dot info.
There were a few characters not allowed in early days of emailing, but now they are allowed in user
name, so the rules may change as the time goes.
But if you have understood the concept we have discussed, I'm sure you will handle any email ID validation
depending on case to case.